Supplementary Material
To Be Is to Make Oneself One: Finite Unity as Made, and How to Test It
Scope
This supplement documents the claims of the article that have been checked in Lean
4. It is not required in order to follow the argument, and it is deliberately short: the
formalization is a consistency apparatus, not a proof engine.
What a machine check establishes here is narrow, and I state it once so that it is not
overread. It establishes that a stated structure is consistent, that a stated conclusion
follows from stated definitions, and, in two cases below, that a stated limitation is
real. It does not establish that the encoded structures are faithful to the philosophical
notions they are named after. Fidelity is defended by the argument of the article and
by nothing in this file.
Two of the sections below certify limits rather than results. Section C ships a
theorem together with the counterexample that bounds its scope; Section D ships,
as a posited field rather than a derived proposition, the one commitment the article
declares as a debt. A formalization that recorded only what succeeds would be of little
evidential use.
All files compile under Lean4.28.0(toolchainleanprover/lean4:v4.28.0) with
nosorry, no added domain axiom, and noimport: each is standalone and may be
checked withlean <file>. Each ends with an audit reproducing, via#print axioms,
the footprint of every theorem cited here. Lean identifiers are given in monospace;
where an identifier carries a name different from the article’s term, the correspondence
is stated. In particular the Lean constructorportageis the article’scarriage.
A. Endorsement is independent of closure
Supports §5.7, the section the article identifies as carrying its principal claim.
File:RosenEndorsement.lean(242 lines, 7 theorems, 0sorry, 0 imports).
Two axes are encoded separately and are given no field in common. Closure to
efficient causation reads a catalyst graph alone:
structure Network where
requires : List Nat
produces : List Nat
def RosenClosed (net : Network) : Prop :=
net.requires.all (fun c => net.produces.contains c) = true
Endorsement reads an energetic profile alone:
structure EnergyProfile where
margin : Nat
reconfig_cost : Nat
energy_external : Bool
def EndogenousEndorsement (p : EnergyProfile) : Prop :=
p.margin≥p.reconfig_cost∧p.margin > 0
The fieldenergy_externalis present and is deliberately idle. Energetic depen-
dence on a milieu is universal, as §5.6 argues, so it must not sort, and no theorem
below turns on it.
Fourwitnessesinhabitthefourcellsofclosure×endorsement(square_inhabited),
so neither axis is a function of the other. The decisive one is a network that produces
every catalyst it requires and carries no store: the flow reactor of §5.7.
theorem closure_does_not_entail_endorsement :
¬(∀e : Entity, closed e→endorses e)
theorem endorsement_separates_within_closure :
closed organism∧closed selfCatalyzingFlow∧
verdict organism = Verdict.self∧
verdict selfCatalyzingFlow = Verdict.carriage
The second is the pair the argument needs.organismandselfCatalyzingFlow
are both closed, so Rosen’s criterion cannot tell them apart, and the endorsement
criterion assigns opposite verdicts. Note that this is not the organism/whirlpool pair
of §5.4, which closure already separates and which therefore establishes only the weaker
claim that cost is present where closure is silent.
Functionalindependenceisthenstateddirectly: entitiessharinganenergeticprofile
share a verdict, whatever their catalyst graph.
theorem verdict_ignores_closure (e1 e2 : Entity)
(h : e1.profile = e2.profile) : verdict e1 = verdict e2
On the strength of the rendering.Closure is encoded minimally, as internal produc-
tion of every required catalyst. Richer(M, R)structure adds constraints, and adding
2
constraints cannot manufacture the witness that matters here, which is a closed entity
that fails to endorse. The independence therefore holds a fortiori for any faithful or
richer rendering, provided closure remains silent about energy storage, which it does.
B. The verdict is a function of the cost profile alone
Supports §5.8, at the point identified there as the account’s greatest exposure.
File:gradient.lean(91 theorems, 0sorry, 0 imports); the result is at line 602.
structure CostProfile where
self_cost : Nat
host_cost : Nat
def regimeOf (p : CostProfile) : CostRegime :=
if p.self_cost > 0 then CostRegime.closure
else if p.host_cost > 0 then CostRegime.portage
else CostRegime.aggregate
theorem cost_profile_determines_regime (p1 p2 : CostProfile)
(h_self : p1.self_cost = p2.self_cost)
(h_host : p1.host_cost = p2.host_cost) :
regimeOf p1 = regimeOf p2
The article claims that the location of the irreversible trace does not vary with the
observer’s carving, and concedes that the claim is empirical in form. A formalization
cannot settle an empirical claim. What it settles is the prior question of whether the
criterionas encodedcontains any discriminant other than the cost split, and it does
not: the regime is a function of the pair(self_cost, host_cost), so two entities
agreeing on that pair agree on their regime whatever else differs between them.
The proof is a rewriting under the definition, and I do not present it as more than
that. A reader is entitled to observe that a profile type with two numeric fields will
not exhibit a third parameter. The point is what the type omits: substrate, scale,
topology, label, and observer are not fields ofCostProfile, so no theorem in the file
can appeal to them, and this is checkable rather than asserted.
C.Thefirstbranch, andthecounterexamplethatbounds
it
Supports §5.3 and the first question of Figure 1.
File:7autoOnto.lean(40 theorems, 0sorry, 0 imports); the result is at line 854.
3
theorem no_third_regime (sys : FiniteSystem) (start : Fin sys.states) :
classifyTrajectory sys start = Regime.dissolves∨
classifyTrajectory sys start = Regime.closure
A companion result,closure_has_cycle, bridges the two: if a trajectory does not
dissolve then it revisits a state, and every intermediate state has positive margin.
Two restrictions belong with the theorem, and both are recorded in the source
rather than left implicit.
First, the scope.FiniteSystempresupposes a finite discrete state space (Fin
states) and deterministic succession. The article’s “every exposed finite being” be-
comes, in the formalization, “every system on a finite discrete state space”. A being
bounded in margin but with a continuous configuration space is not covered; the
corresponding statement there would fall under Poincaré recurrence, and I have not
established it. The counterexample is explicit: onNwith successorn7→n+ 1the
trajectory never revisits a state, and neither disjunct holds.
Second, what the theorem does not give. It yields recurrence, not endorsement.
That a trajectory returns to a state says nothing about which margin paid for the
return, and the trichotomy of §5.3 is settled at the second branch, not this one.
A further result records the status of the third regime. Under conservation of the
maintenance cost together with its strict positivity, no entity has both shares null:
theorem aggregate_impossible (e : FiniteEntity) :¬noRegeneration e
Caution on use.This concerns the distribution of a cost already taken as given, and it
is the formal counterpart of the article’s claim in §5.3 that carriage and aggregate are
privations rather than positive kinds. It is not a claim about the stone, and it does not
bear on the equivocation §2.5 refuses, where the drain of an aggregate is distinguished
from an expenditure that buys continuation.
D. A declared debt, mechanized
Supports §7.3.
File:7autoOnto.lean, line 287.
class FiniteExposed (α: Type) where
margin :α→Nat
drain :α→Nat
drain_pos :∀a, 0 < drain a
The strict positivity of the drain is a field of the class, not a proposition derived
within it. This is the formal shape of the debt §7.3 declares: the article presents
4
the drain as a posit about our irreversible world, and the development enters it as a
constraint rather than proving it. Every result carrying the class inherits that status,
including the exhaustion theoremgeneric_exhaustionproved for allFiniteExposed
types.
I include this section because a supplement certifying only successes would leave
the most checkable of the article’s four debts uncorroborated.
E. The separating model of immanent necessity
Supports §6.2.
File:INu_Necessity.lean(352 lines, 13 theorems, 0sorry, 0 imports).
The argument of §6 turns on the alternative being coherent: if the contingent
act could not be constructed without contradiction, the necessity claimed for the self-
grounded act would be obtained by definition.
Two act types are opposed.SelfGroundedActhas an endogenous margin and no
external ground;act_is_necessaryestablishes that persistence requires the cost to
be payable on the proper margin, andinaction_is_dissolutionthat inaction is not
a stable state.ContingentActcarries anexternal_groundthat compensates the cost;
contingent_survives_without_economyandcontingent_waste_not_existential
establishthatforitthecostofrenewalisoptionalandwasteisnotexistential.contingency_needs_external
showsthatanon-necessaryactwouldrequireanexternalground, andself_ground_suffices
that self-grounding excludes one.
What this certifies is joint constructibility: the two acts coexist in one consistent
development, so the necessity of §6.2 is conditional on self-grounding rather than an-
alytic. It does not certify that “self-grounded” as encoded captures self-grounding as
the article uses the term.
F. What is not formalized
Stated for completeness, so that the unlisted is not taken to be unformalizable.
The argument of §2 is not mechanized and is not a candidate for mechanization:
that finitude entails exposure, and that the ideal crystal removes exposure while retain-
ing finitude, are conceptual claims about the notions involved and not consequences
of a stated structure.
The independence result of Section A above is proved for a minimal rendering of
closure. A rendering with full(M, R)replacement structure has not been carried out,
and the article’s claim that the independence survives it is argued rather than checked.
The material on the intermediate regime and its parameter of modal renewal,
5
present in earlier presentations of this framework, has no referent in the present article
and is not included here.
Availability
The Lean sources are supplied with this submission. The public repository address is
withheld to preserve anonymity and will be supplied on acceptance.
6